# Open Source India - Questions from divya

### What according to you can be done to best support FOSS leaders?

I think it is important to take a step back and examine the classifications of actors bundled into that question. It seems there is a (largely outdated) conceptualization of "FOSS leaders" as individuals who build monolithic projects from scratch. While this still happens in 2020 (I am writing this response in Zettlr, a production-quality Zettelkasten writing tool build almost entirely by one person) it's extremely uncommon for the projects we think of as "leadership" projects. Most of the other large FOSS tools I can immediately point to in my daily use don't fit this model: GNU, Linux, Firefox, Bitwarden, Emacs, Telegram (clients), git, Inkscape, vscode, VLC, Signal, nginx, the Apache toolchain, Clojure, Electron/Chrome, Debian/Ubuntu, and the entire Java ecosystem. These projects are **massive** and are usually funded in on the order of millions of dollars.

If "FOSS leaders" is ambiguous, "support" might be even moreso. Do these projects require monetary support? Better support for management? Better marketing? In each case it will be different. Arguably, Chrome requires no support that Google can't already provide. It has money, marketshare, marketing, distribution, and project management all which the Chrome project can draw from.

On the other hand, we see relatively small projects like Signal struggling to make an impact. Its usability is lacking and its marketshare trails far behind that of WhatsApp, a closed system which relies on the same encryption technology. Are the Signal developers "FOSS leaders"? How much of the market do they need to win to prove that they are? Take an even less-known case in Wire, a chat app that competes with WhatsApp and Signal — I know no one who uses it. Are the Wire developers "FOSS leaders"? Arguably not.

If we break down the question into components, we can find these background questions:

#### What makes someone a "FOSS leader"?

The notion that F/OSS is a sort of meritocracy which bends to the will of the market (as do all things) is probably not an unfair judgment. Projects surface, gain traction, "win", "lose", and die. No software project is forever but those which serve the society best, at the present time, are likely those which deserve most of our attention. There is a deeper tension here, obviously, which is the difference in technical strategy between industry giants Microsoft and Apple: do you support software with backward-compatibility almost to the beginning of the personal computing revolution (Microsoft) or do you actively obsolete hardware and software in the interest of pushing your projects and the industry forward with less baggage (Apple)?

The Apache Webserver has been around for a very long time and many people find very high utility in it. A non-trivial percentage of the market has moved to nginx. Given that long before the advent of smart phones, the web was the winning battleground for Linux and F/OSS, we have to accept that many of the leaders from F/OSS might be viewed as captains of sinking ships. That's okay. But to judge who the leaders are and who are not requires an analysis of every project under the consideration of someone who wants to contribute — whether that's funding, time and code, or other resources.

#### What is "support"?

The world isn't moving away from money any time soon and its near-tautological value ("because everyone wants money, everyone wants money") is true for all sustainable projects. The value of support itself requires quite a bit of introspection before we can get to the point where we see a clear action to take. What do we want the projects we support to become? Do we hope them to grow into profitable businesses so they no longer require handouts? Do we hope to see them staffed by volunteers and operating on distributed donations? Which projects fit which models best, in our opinion, and which models do we prefer to support?

Take Wikipedia and Bitwarden. Wikipedia has actively chosen to avoid commercial models with the intention of remaining objective and untainted because the content curated by Wikimedia is of much higher value than the software it produces. Bitwarden, on the other hand, is a business. Bitwarden itself is Free Software although it runs exclusively on Microsoft Windows and .NET (both closed technologies). Despite this, Bitwarden is sufficiently atomic that there is unlikely to be a conflict of interest which prevents it from continuing in its Free Software capacity due to the kinds of corruption possible in the Wikimedia case.

Bitwarden is a healthy example of a self-sustaining project which operates within a traditional business model. Whether Bitwarden will succeed or not is hard to predict but external financial "support" in Bitwarden's case is almost certain to pollute it. As for Wikimedia, it's very unlikely that a self-sustaining business model is possible at all. For now, Wikimedia remains pure by begging for handouts on which to hire staff and run their servers.

Some projects can handle financial support (and would do well to have it) while others are likely to drown from that very same support. If you want to support Bitwarden, you have to buy their product.

Other forms of support include immaterial contributions, like volunteer development/operations and contributions from paid developers. It's important to note that, unlike financial support, this is a liquid market. Financial support in the F/OSS world is a paradox of choice — a buyer's dilemma of the nth degree. The financial markets for F/OSS are not liquid. But hackers, server admins, and designers know what projects they value as individuals and they know how they value their own time. As such, some will contribute long nights and weekends to projects they love. At $200/hr, these contributions can amount to a lot even when measured with the blunt instrument of currency. At many companies where I've worked, it is a necessity for developers to contribute back to the open source projects they rely on at work. Here, that $200/hr figure is reified — that person is contributing during their salaried hours in the office. Depending on the developer's interest, the company's reliance on the code, and the willingness of management to invest-by-proxy through the contributions of staff, these kinds of contributions can become substantial — but also largely unaccounted for.

#### How to best support F/OSS leaders?

There is a great deal of hidden value in these transactions. The vast majority of Free and open source software is built this way, not by volunteers funded by philanthropy. Thus, returning to the original question: _"What can best be done to support FOSS leaders?"_ the goal becomes slightly more abstract: **make these transactions salient.** Whoever is providing support needs to introspect: What is the underlying reason I am interested in F/OSS? What kinds of projects align with this F/OSS philsophy and with my (organization's) goals? 

Once a supporter understands herself and her organization's relationship to F/OSS — and the projects which are amenable to this relationship — she can then measure where this intersects with her and her organization's capacity to offer support. If the organization is a software company itself, it's possible the best contributions it can make are fulltime contributions from developers it already staffs, preferably those who already contribute to these F/OSS products. If the organization is a software product company, it's possible the best contributions will be those of the market: build out Free Software ^ for which the company can offer service and support in the forms of subscriptions and recurring support contracts. If the organization acts as a financier, it needs to evaluate what returns it hopes to see on its investments. No returns but the expansion of human knowledge? Wikimedia might make sense. Returns in the form of a self-sustaining company? Look for a product firm that wants to build services on Free Software. ^ Returns in the form of open source software ^ which supports the investor or its related bodies? Give money directly to the project or hire its lead developer(s).

^ I am intentionally differentiating between "Free Software" and "open source software" in this paragraph because under different business models they serve very different purposes. A self-sustaining company (say, Bitwarden or Mozilla) is better built on Free Software because it will not lean on fragile models like open-core, which perpetuate the idea that intellectual property has intrinsic value for individual agencies. Software in supporting roles (say, the `gettext` internationalization library or the Electron framework) mostly lives in the "open source" world in the sense that systems software is less likely to succumb to outdated ideas about intellectual property and market fit. These are rough guidelines.




Other than not so friendly useability that you mentioned, are they any challenges you faced
Community wise <supportive/friendly/toxic>
Do you think one must encourage FOSS adoption, do you see sectors within the country that could benefit by shifting from proprietary to FOSS?
If yes, how so?
What are the key areas/sector according to you that would benefit from moving from proprietary software to FOSS

