# Open Source India: Coops

There is a small emergent trend, particularly within India, of new software companies structuring themselves as cooperatives. More often than not, these software cooperatives have free (or open source) software as a key component of their business strategy. To understand why, we need to examine exactly what these two concepts intend to achieve, where they intersect, and how they diverge.

Cooperatives take on different political colours the world over and even a quick read of the Wikipedia entry on cooperatives will demonstrate just how unclear some of the ideals become in different socioeconomic contexts. [1] Some coops take on shades of socialism while others reject the principles of charity and welfare altogether. What unifies coops is their conformance to The Cooperative Identity, and little else. [2] The core operational aspects of this Identity are found in the seven Cooperative Principles (formerly Rochdale Principles). [3] Software coops tend to be structured as worker coops, where each employee controls one share or vote in the corporation. Membership, control, and capital are described by the first three Cooperative Principles. While the democratic control of worker coops defines their structure as a corporation, it is adherence to the remaining four principles which causes coops to share ideological space with the free and open source software (FOSS) movements: autonomy, education, cooperation, and community. We can examine how each of these four axes intersects with FOSS.

Unlike coops, encoded FOSS ideals say nothing about these four axes. The Free Software philosophy describes a system of ethics underpinning the user's Four Essential Freedoms which define whether software is Free or not. [4] Open Source values describe an "attitude" and "principles of the open source way" which underpin the Open Source Definition. [5,6,7] But none of these ethics or attitudes are directly encoded in the licenses which define FOSS. By their very nature, FOSS licenses _do not dictate_ your behaviour. This is part of the reason why libertarians and communists can both (rightly) see an ally in FOSS; it is a sort of political chameleon. Conversely, cooperative corporations are legally bound to encode certain structures and behaviours into themselves. As it turns out, these happen to be the structures and behaviours which form the philosophical foundation of FOSS. As such, a cooperative enterprise will naturally gravitate toward FOSS, but not the other way around.

Coops seeking _autonomy_ (Principle 4) requires that they actively avoid tethering themselves to other people, organizations, or resources which restrict them. Proprietary software is inherently restrictive to the consumer, which is antithetical to a cooperative's autonomy. While the Four Essential Freedoms are essentially a practical description of computer user autonomy, they free the user and bind the software. There is nothing about these freedoms which prevents the user from restricting her own autonomy; a company which uses FOSS software might encumber itself in other ways. It is only in the explicit case (such as in Principle 4) where the requirement of autonomy leads to FOSS, not the inverse.

Coops desiring internal _education_ (Principle 5) requires that they consume transparent resources which can be learned. Again, the Second Essential Freedom of free software describes this concisely: "The freedom to study how the program works (and change it so it does your computing as you wish)." Proprietary software is opaque and cannot be studied. Furthermore, arbitrary restrictions which prevent modification of software also prevent the members of a coop from experiential learning, a very important aspect of education in software.

Cooperative Principles 4 and 5 are internal and deal more with how coops consume resources and interact with third parties. To maintain autonomy and educate their members, coops will always prefer to consume FOSS if they are aware of it.

Coops engaged in _cooperation with other cooperatives_ (Principle 6) will be required to produce resources which are transparent and accessible. Whether at local, national, or international scales, all cooperation relies on effective and frictionless communication. FOSS does not dictate cooperation; some FOSS projects are actively hostile toward external contribution. But cooperative software projects lend themselves to FOSS licensing. While a FOSS license does not force its users to cooperate (or not), there is no such thing as "cooperative proprietary software" at all. Cooperation and proprietary licensing are mutually exclusive.

Last, coops demonstrating _concern for community_ (Principle 7) will build upon Principle 6. When the seventh principle was added in 1995, it is unlikely the International Co-operative Alliance was thinking of globally-distributed FOSS software teams as an interpretation of the word "community". [3] Yet, the wording is sufficiently non-specific as to comfortably permit this interpretation. Principle 6 actively discusses international cooperation, and it is reasonable to parallel "community" at the same global scale. "Concern for the [FOSS] community" then becomes a specific directive: coops should cooperate not only with other coops, but with other agents in the construction and maintenance of free and open software technologies.

If Cooperative Principles 4 and 5 are internal, Principles 6 and 7 are then external, dealing with how a coop might produce software. Coops should exclusively produce FOSS (arguably, even strictly adhering to a "free software" defintion) if they produce software at all.

People are often confused by free and open source software because it does not pick sides. It is written down in contracts: software licenses. These contracts do not state, or even imply, compatible government policy or corporate structure. It is the job of these contracts to free the users over a future-focused timeline. Cooperatives make a political statement. Worker coops, in particular, put control of the corporation in the hands of the employees. In the nineteenth century, employee-owned corporations meant that, within the bounds of the corporation, workers controlled the means of production. In the twenty-first century, the "means of production" are a laptop and an internet connection. 180 years later, software worker coops are not defined by socialist microcosms as those ideas are barely relevant to the industry. Instead, software worker coops deeply embrace the core principles of cooperatives, which lead them to free and open technologies.

[1] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cooperative
[2] https://www.ica.coop/en/cooperatives/cooperative-identity
[3] https://web.archive.org/web/20091029163330/http://www.ica.coop/coop/principles-revisions.html
[4] https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.en.html
[5] https://opensource.com/resources/what-open-source
[6] https://opensource.com/open-source-way
[7] https://opensource.org/osd
